---
title: Reflecting on 10 Years of Competitive Melee (and other games)
published: 2025-01-07
description: 'A look-back on my history with Melee and its impact on my life.'
image: './meleeposter.jpg'
tags: [Gaming, Melee, Life]
category: 'Gaming'
draft: false 
lang: ''
---

This month marks 10 years since I attended my first _Super Smash Bros. Melee_ tournament, something that I had no idea at the time would radically change my life. To commemorate this, I wanted to talk about my history with the game and how it has impacted me.

# Early Years

My first experience with the _Super Smash Bros._ series was in the 3rd grade, when a classmate showed me the E3 2006 trailer for the then upcoming _Brawl_ one morning before class. 
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/a5JPYQeHE7M?si=E-Kb3i-MY9CDSyzr" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
<p class="caption">Truly a revolutionary moment for a young me.</p>

I had never heard of the series before this, and had no idea who most of the characters in the video were, but I was still instantly mesmerized by how cool the game and the characters looked. He told me that this was actually going to be the 3rd game in the series, and that there was already one on the GameCube called _Melee._ Thankfully, I did have a GameCube that was primarily a _Sonic Riders_ machine for me at the time. I was fully on the hype train for _Brawl_ from that point on, and was desperate to get _Melee_ and play it. I spent many days after school looking up information about _Melee_ on the school computers before my mom took me home, thinking about how awesome it would be to get to play it. I eventually convinced my parents to buy _Melee_ for me at Walmart, and it was hard to contain my excitement. I came home and hurriedly rushed to my room to put the disc in my GameCube and was greeted by the amazing intro cutscene. I’m sure all _Melee_ fans remember how great it is. 
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/3JbUBPlww3A?si=jXQkzh32EOZ-SEKR" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
<p class="caption">Doesn't get much better than this.</p>

It was through playing _Melee_ that I discovered many other games that would eventually become some of my all time favorites. As previously mentioned, I knew almost none of the characters in this game or the _Brawl_ trailer. It was limited to just the _Mario_ characters and Pikachu. It was through _Melee_ that I was introduced to characters like Link, Samus, and Ness, all of which come from games that would eventually become some of my favorites. Before this, the only game series that I was particularly into was _Sonic_, so you can imagine my excitement when he was eventually announced for _Brawl_.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/8PgxEQuFp2c?si=Nt1QTPrFzPHxTayI" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
<p class="caption">Will I ever be more excited than 10-year old me was when he saw this? Not sure.</p>

I actually had some knowledge of the competitive scene for _Melee_ even then, since I first got the game in 2007. This was 6 years after the game first released in 2001, and the early competitive scene was well underway by that point. When I looked up information about the game, I could find that Fox was supposed to be the best character in the game, so I picked him for a while when playing against some of my friends. I also saw that someone named Ken was considered the best player, who played Marth, so I picked up that character for sometime before the release of _Brawl_. Of course, once _Brawl_ finally released, I played that game constantly, and _Melee_ fell by the wayside for me.

# Joining the Competitive Scene

I rediscovered _Melee_ in my junior year of high school, when a classmate was into the game and asked if I had ever played it. I told him I had, but not since I was a kid. I never fully lost interest in the _Smash_ series. In fact, at this point I was heavily excited for and actively speculating on the upcoming _Smash_ game, commonly called _Smash 4_. However, I was convinced to pick up _Melee_ again and we started playing the game together. Eventually, I found on Facebook, 10 years ago this month, that there was supposed to be a _Melee_ tournament at a local card game shop and so we decided to go and try our luck against new people. This would turn out to be a life-changing decision for me.

I don’t remember exactly how I did, but I know it wasn’t great. I had some practice with some of the most important techniques, but I wasn’t very consistent at all. I distinctly remember attempting to go for a Ken combo, a famous Marth combo named after the aforementioned player, but completely missed and lost a stock as a result. Despite this, I was still very happy to have gone. I had never found a hobby or extracurricular that I particularly enjoyed during school, and I struggled a lot with social anxiety, so I was very excited to find a community of people who also enjoyed something I did.

I got my driver’s license not long after this first tournament, so the first time I would drive outside of my hometown in London, KY would be to attend a _Melee_ tournament an hour away in Richmond. It was here that I would meet some of my closest friends today for the first time. I would win one set before losing twice to be eliminated, but I did get to play the tournament organizer in the bracket, which was exciting for me at the time. You can actually find the bracket [here](https://challonge.com/CSaR2_SSBM_1v1) where my tag is “Farko”. I also got to play a doubles set on the live stream which you can see here. Major shout-outs to Xanthus for running this event and keeping these videos online for us to see all these years later.
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Xjt8nS4cLLo?si=RfThfWioR5OplmLJ" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
<p class="caption">While you can't see me in the webcam, you can see my Marth's propensity for foward-smashing.</p>

This tournament in particular was especially important since it was where I became introduced to the wider Kentucky _Melee_ scene that I would become an active member of in the years to come. I met many new people, of which several would become dear friends, and I got to travel to numerous states that I had never been to before to attend tournaments. One particular interesting event I went to during this time was WTFox, a major tournament in Memphis, TN where Mango and Leffen, two of the game's most famous players, commentated a set I played on stream. As you might expect, they didn't mention anything about my gameplay, but it was still a fun experience for me at the time.
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/lufwM6wtBHU?si=9M66f5u4K8e0raD8&amp;start=872" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
<p class="caption">Even though I lost terribly in front of the world, at least I was representing the Mother 3 shirt.</p>

I started attending Smashfests, house events where everyone played _Melee_, and weekly tournaments in the central Kentucky area frequently in the coming years. I even hosted my own weekly tournament series at my college for a brief time. Despite me struggling in my college work during these years, I still had _Melee_ to fall back on as a source of fun and reprieve from my academic woes. During 2018, a year where I decided to take a break from college, I focused even harder on _Melee_, practicing the game and traveling more than ever to attend events, creating some lasting memories. This would keep going on until the end of 2018 with the release of the new _Smash_ game, _Super Smash Bros. Ultimate_.

# Smash 5

In 2019, I largely stopped playing _Melee_ in favor of _Ultimate_, becoming an active member of that game’s local community. I arguably had more success in my relatively short time with this game than I did in _Melee_. I was ranked in the top 15 of the state, made top 8 at a regional level tournament, and was voted “Favorite Player” by the local community that year. I never achieved similar results in _Melee_ before this point. Because of various differences between _Melee_ and the _Smash_ games that succeeded it, mainly in that the newer games have slower and less explosive gameplay, it’s rare for _Melee_ players to also play these new games. In our scene, only two other _Melee_ players would pick up _Ultimate_ as more than a passing curiosity and achieve similar or greater success. Players who came from the _Smash 4_ scene often saw me as being a _Melee_ player first and foremost, a consequence of these games having largely separate communities. Personally though, I saw myself as being a general _Smash_ player who simply preferred _Melee_, as I’ve been open to the idea of playing different games and have entered a tournament for every official _Smash_ title as well as some unofficial ones.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/entZTB_vM6c?si=xelUnz7V58wCEv9v&amp;start=191" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
<p class="caption">I think we can agree that this was my finest moment during my time with Ultimate.</p>

I entered 2020 feeling confident and optimistic about my _Ultimate_ performance. I had even just gained a sponsorship with a local organization that would pay for tournament entry fees. This would unforunately come to an end with the start of the COVID pandemic that year. With in-person tournaments on pause, the only way to play the game with other people was using the notoriously poor online play. I tried this for a few months, but eventually stopped having fun because of the poor online experience. However, around this time, a _Melee_ mod called [Slippi](https://slippi.gg/) was released that allowed for smooth online play that far exceeded _Ultimate’s_. Naturally, I started to pick _Melee_ back up using Slippi. While in-person tournaments were on pause for the remainder of 2020 and partway into 2021, Slippi was the only way I played any _Smash_ game online. Once tournaments returned, I continued to play _Ultimate_ for about a year, but a combination of the online experience, a changing metagame, and the release of new characters made the game less enjoyable for me. So, I started to attend _Melee_ tournaments again.

This second _Melee_ run was more successful for me. I had improved my mentality towards competition through playing _Ultimate_, and I was able to apply that to _Melee_. Because of this, I became locally ranked in _Melee_ for the first time, becoming one of only 3 people in the state to be ranked in both _Melee_ and any of its sequels. My _Melee_ improvement was hampered somewhat though because I also decided to dip my toes into some other fighting games. Around this time I picked up _Guilty Gear Strive_, a more traditional fighting game. Traditional fighting games would be games that derive themselves from the gameplay and controls of _Street Fighter 2_, whereas the _Smash_ series has an entirely different control scheme and gameplay feel. Fighting games that play like _Smash_ are instead commonly called platform fighters. I had played some traditional fighters casually as a child, but this would be the first time I would start attending tournaments for them.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/m0ABOTZp3Gw?si=KI4THmJ73Y_Ptd83&amp;" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
<p class="caption">One of my most interesting sets from my time with Strive.</p>

I would dabble in some of these games for the next few years, while still continuing to enter _Melee_ events. My two most notable achievements were likely winning a local event for _Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3_, using the same team I used when I played casually as a young teen, and making it far into the bracket of a _Street Fighter 6_ regional event near the game’s launch. However, I would eventually start to distance myself from the genre as I realized that I simply had more fun with the unrestricted movement in the platform fighter genre. This became most obvious a few months ago with the release of [_Rivals of Aether 2_](https://rivals2.com/), a platform fighter that combines elements from _Melee_, the later _Smash_ games, and its own original mechanics to create a fighting game that I found more fun than any other in recent years. While I don’t think I can ever fully stop playing _Melee_, _Rivals 2_ has captured a lot of my attention since its release. We’ll see how far I’ll be able to take the game.

It’s interesting to see that all of this history really does lead right back to _Melee_. That morning in 3rd grade where I saw the _Brawl_ trailer for the first time may have been one of the most important in my life. It was there that my love for the _Smash_ series started, which would end up changing my life. It was through _Melee_ and _Brawl_ that I discovered many of the games that I now love immensely, largely starting my love for gaming in general. Competitive _Melee_ would give me friends that I cherish to this day, motivation to improve myself, and the courage to overcome my social anxiety. I may not have ever become involved with all the other games I’ve played competitively if I didn’t already have my experience with _Melee_. I truly hope that everyone can have something that can change their lives like _Melee_ has mine. Here’s to many more decades of _Melee_.
